# Smashing an Object



---
*Player's Handbook v3.5, p.165*

**Armor Class:** Objects are easier to hit than creatures because they usually don’t move, but many are tough enough to shrug off some damage from each blow. An object’s Armor Class is equal to 10 + its size modifier + its Dexterity modifier. An inanimate object has not only a Dexterity of 0 (–5 penalty to AC), but also an additional –2 penalty to its AC. Furthermore, if you take a full-round action to line up a shot, you get an automatic hit with a melee weapon and a +5 bonus on attack rolls with a ranged weapon.  
**Hardness:** Each object has hardness—a number that represents how well it resists damage. Whenever an object takes damage, subtract its hardness from the damage. Only damage in excess of its hardness is deducted from the object’s hit points (see Table 9–8: Common Armor, Weapon, and Shield Hardness and Hit Points; Table 9–9: Substance Hardness and Hit Points; and Table 9–11: Object Hardness and Hit Points).  
**Hit Points:** An object’s hit point total depends on what it is made of and how big it is (see Table 9–8, Table 9–9, and Table 9–11). When an object’s hit points reach 0, it’s ruined. Very large objects have separate hit point totals for different sections. For example, you can attack and ruin a wagon wheel without destroying the whole wagon.  
**Energy Attacks:** Acid and sonic attacks deal damage to most objects just as they do to creatures; roll damage and apply it normally after a successful hit. Electricity and fire attacks deal half damage to most objects; divide the damage dealt by 2 before applying the hardness. Cold attacks deal one-quarter damage to most objects; divide the damage dealt by 4 before applying the hardness.  
**Ranged Weapon Damage:** Objects take half damage from ranged weapons (unless the weapon is a siege engine or something similar). Divide the damage dealt by 2 before applying the object’s hardness.
**Ineffective Weapons:** The DM may determine that certain weapons just can’t effectively deal damage to certain objects. For example, you may have a hard time chopping down a door by shooting arrows at it or cutting a rope with a club.
**Immunities:** Objects are immune to nonlethal damage and to critical hits. Even animated objects, which are otherwise considered creatures, have these immunities because they are constructs.  
**Magic Armor, Shields, and Weapons:** Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2 to the hardness of armor, a weapon, or a shield and +10 to the item’s hit points. For example, a +1 longsword has hardness 12 and 15 hp, while a +3 heavy steel shield has hardness 16 and 50 hp.  
**Vulnerability to Certain Attacks:** The DM may rule that certain attacks are especially successful against some objects. For example, it’s easy to light a curtain on fire, chop down a tree with an ax, or rip up a scroll. In such cases, attacks deal double their normal damage and may (at the DM’s discretion) ignore the object’s hardness.  
**Damaged Objects:** A damaged object remains fully functional until the item’s hit points are reduced to 0, at which point it is destroyed. For instance, the wielder of a damaged weapon takes no penalty due to the weapon’s damage, and damaged armor and shields still provide their full normal bonus to AC. Damaged (but not destroyed) objects can be repaired with the Craft skill (see page 70).  
**Saving Throws:** Nonmagical, unattended items never make saving throws. They are considered to have failed their saving throws, so they always are affected by (for instance) a disintegrate spell. An item attended by a character (being grasped, touched, or worn) makes saving throws as the character (that is, using the character’s saving throw bonus).